# demo1920corsoA
Repository dell'a.a 2019-2020 del corso A

Edsger Wybe Dijkstra
Netherlands, Europe - 1972


For fundamental contributions to programming as a high, intellectual 
challenge; for eloquent insistence and practical demonstration that 
programs should be composed correctly, not just debugged into 
correctness; for illuminating perception of problems at the foundations 
of program design.

Edsger W. Dijkstra was born in 1930 in Rotterdam, The Netherlands. His 
father, a high-school chemistry teacher, served as president of the 
Dutch Chemical Society. His mother, who never held a formal job, had a 
lasting influence on his approach to mathematics and his emphasis on 
elegance.

Graduating from high school in 1948 and intending to become a 
theoretical physicist, Dijkstra thought the ability to use an electronic 
computer might be advantageous. Three years of programming at the 
Mathematical Center in Amsterdam convinced him that the intellectual 
challenge of programming exceeded that of theoretical physics, but where 
was the sound body of knowledge that could support programming as an 
intellectually respectable discipline? His boss, A. van Wijngaarden, 
persuaded him that in the years to come he could be one of the people to 
make programming a respectable discipline. Completing his study of 
physics as quickly as he could, Dijkstra forsook physics for 
programming.

At the Mathematical Centre a major project was building the ARMAC 
computer. For its official inauguration in 1956, Dijkstra devised a 
program to solve a problem interesting to a nontechnical audience: Given 
a network of roads connecting cities, what is the shortest route between 
two designated cities? The best known algorithms had running times which 
grew as the cube of the network’s size; the running time of Dijkstra’s 
algorithm grew only as the square. Developed in 20 minutes while 
Dijkstra was relaxing on a café terrace with his fiancée, Maria (Ria) C. 
Debets, his Shortest Path algorithm is still used in such applications 
as packet-switching software for computer communications.

Around the same time, Dijkstra invented another very efficient network 
algorithm for use in designing the X1 computer. Known as the Minimum 
Spanning Tree algorithm, it finds the shortest length of wire needed to 
connect a given set of points on a wiring panel. He published both 
network algorithms in a single paper in 1959.[3]  

When Dijkstra and Maria Debets married in 1957, the marriage rites 
required him to state his profession. When he stated that he was a 
programmer, the authorities objected that there was no such profession, 
and the marriage certificate instead identifies him as a theoretical 
physicist.

While at the Mathematical Center, Dijkstra worked on the very important 
“real-time interrupt” problem, which became the topic of his Ph.D. 
thesis [2].  Several computer manufacturers of the day were facing the 
same problem, but they had not approached the problem with the rigor 
that Dijkstra applied to it.

At the Mathematical Center, Dijkstra and J.A.Zonneveld developed the 
first compiler for Algol-60, a high-level programming language designed 
by an international committee. Completed in August 1960, their compiler 
predates the second Algol-60 compiler by more than a year. One of 
Algol-60’s great innovations, for which Dijkstra was instrumental, was 
the explicit introduction of recursion. He was probably the first to 
introduce the notion of a “stack” for translating recursive programs, 
reporting this seminal work in a short article [4].  In the Oxford 
English Dictionary, the terms “vector” and “stack” in a computing 
context are attributed to Dijkstra.

In 1962 Dijkstra was appointed Professor of Mathematics at the Eindhoven 
University of Technology. There he built the THE operating system (named 
for the university, then known as Technische Hogeschool te Eindhoven), 
which has influenced the design of many subsequent operating systems. It 
introduced a number of design principles which have become part of the 
working vocabulary of every professional programmer. Introducing the 
reprint of Dijkstra’s article on the THE operating system in the 25th 
Anniversary issue of Communications of the ACM, the Editor-in-Chief 
wrote, “This project initiated a long line of research in multilevel 
systems architecture—a line that continues to the present day because 
hierarchical modularity is a powerful approach to organizing large 
systems.”


In 1968, Dijkstra published a brief letter to the editor in 
Communications of ACM, titled “Go To statement considered harmful”[5], 
arguing that the GO TO statement, found in many high-level programming 
languages, is a major source of errors, and should therefore be 
eliminated. There ensued a giant commotion in the computing community, 
with combatants taking positions on all sides of the issue. The debate 
has long since subsided; programming languages now provide alternatives 
to the GO TO. Few programmers today use it liberally, and most never use 
it at all.
 

Around this time, Dijkstra was beginning to formulate some of his early 
ideas about programming as a mathematical discipline. He pointed out 
that software productivity and reliability is closely related to rigor 
in design, which eliminates software flaws at an early stage. He was 
particularly impressed by the immensity of the so-called “software 
crisis” when he attended the famous 1968 NATO Conference on Software 
Engineering, the first conference devoted to the growing epidemic of 
software delivered late, over budget, and full of flaws. Convinced that 
programming methodology should become a scientific discipline, he 
decided to study how to avoid complexity in software designs.
